Add Python interfaces based on nanobind (#796)
LLNL/sundials: doc/shared/Python/Usage.rst

   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
   SUNDIALS Copyright End
   ----------------------------------------------------------------

.. _Python.Usage:

Using sundials4py
=================

At a high level, using SUNDIALS from Python via sundials4py looks a lot like using SUNDIALS from C or C++.

The few notable differences are:

View Classes and Memory Management
----------------------------------

sundials4py provides natural usage of SUNDIALS objects with natural Python object lifetimes managed by the Python garbage collection as with any other Python object.
There is only one caveat that arises with ``void*`` objects/variables due to restrictions in nanobind: 
the SUNDIALS integrator/solver memory ``void*`` objects are (behind the scenes) wrapped in "View" classes.
These view objects cannot be implicitly converted to the underlying ``void*``. As such, when calling a function which operates on these ``void*`` objects, one must
extract the ``void*`` "capsule" from the view object by calling the view's ``get`` method:

.. code-block:: python
   
   from sundials4py.core import *
   from sundials4py.cvode import *

   sunctx = SUNContext_Create(SUN_COMM_NULL)

>    cvode = CVodeCreate(CV_BDF, sunctx)

Reviewer: Should this actually be:
```suggestion
   cvode = CVodeCreate(CV_BDF, sunctx.get())
```

Author: No, the sunctx can be passed directly. Only the integrator memory blocks need the `.get()`.

   # notice we need to call cvode.get()

>    status = CVodeInit(cvode.get(), lambda t, y, ydot, _: ode_problem.f(t, y, ydot), T0, y)

Reviewer: It would be helpful if the documentation added some text at this point to discuss why function pointers need to use the `lambda t, y, ydot, _: ode_problem.f(t, y, ydot)` syntax above, as opposed to merely giving `ode_problem.f`.  Would an alternate option be to specify `ode_problem.f` itself as allowing the fourth argument but ignoring it?

Author: You cannot pass `ode_problem.f` because it actually has the additional `self` argument as the first argument since it is a member function. Omitting the user data arg is just for convenience.

Return-by-Pointer Parameters
----------------------------

Functions that return values via pointer arguments in the C API are mapped to Python functions that return a tuple:

- **First element:** The function's return value (typically an error code).
- **Subsequent elements:** Values that would be returned via pointer arguments in C, in the same order as the C function signature.

**Example 1: Single Return-by-Pointer Value**

C:
   .. code-block:: C

      int CVodeGetNumSteps(void *cvode_mem, long int *numsteps);

Python:
   .. code-block:: python

>       retval, numsteps = CVodeGetNumSteps(cvode_mem)

Reviewer: Should this actually be 
```suggestion
      retval, numsteps = CVodeGetNumSteps(cvode_mem.get())
```

      print(f"Number of steps: {numsteps}")

**Example 2: Multiple Return-by-Pointer Values**

C:
   .. code-block:: C

      int CVodeGetIntegratorStats(void *cvode_mem,
                                 long int *nsteps,
                                 long int *nfevals,
                                 long int *nlinsetups,
                                 long int *netfails);

Python:
   .. code-block:: python

>       retval, nsteps, nfevals, nlinsetups, netfails = CVodeGetIntegratorStats(cvode_mem)

Reviewer: And should this be:
```suggestion
      retval, nsteps, nfevals, nlinsetups, netfails = CVodeGetIntegratorStats(cvode_mem.get())
```

      print(f"Steps: {nsteps}, Function evals: {nfevals}, Linear setups: {nlinsetups}, Error test fails: {netfails}")

Arrays
------

``N_Vector`` objects in sundials4py are compatible with numpy's `ndarray`. Each ``N_Vector`` can work on a numpy arrays without copies, and you can access 
and modify the underlying data directly using :py:func:`N_VGetArrayPointer`, which returns a numpy `ndarray` view of the data.

- SUNDIALS matrix types (dense, banded, sparse) are also exposed as Python objects that provide access to their underlying data as numpy arrays (e.g., via :py:func:`SUNDenseMatrix_Data`).
- Arrays of scalars (e.g., scaling factors passed to :py:func:`N_VLinearCombination`) are also represented as numpy arrays.

**Example: Accessing and modifying an N_Vector**

.. code-block:: python

   y_nvec = NVectorView.Create(N_VNew_Serial(10, sunctx.get()))

>    y = N_VGetArrayPointer(y_nvec.get())

Reviewer 2: Is `.get()` still needed for these objects? If not there are several other instances in the file that will need updating too.

   y[:] = np.linspace(0, 1, 10)  # Set values using numpy

**Example: Using a matrix as a numpy array**

.. code-block:: python

   mat = SUNMatrixView.Create(SUNDenseMatrix(3, 3, sunctx.get()))
   arr = SUNDenseMatrix_Data(mat.get())

>    arr = np.eye(3)  # Set to identity matrix

Reviewer: Can you clarify why the N_Vector example above used `y[:] = ...` while this dense matrix example used `arr = `?  Are these syntaxes interchangable, or is there a subtle difference between the two?

I would also mention here that the SUNDIALS dense matrix happens to be stored column-wise in a 1D array, as opposed to a 2D numpy array.  Perhaps above it could be `**Example: Using a matrix stored column-wise as a 1D numpy array**`

Author: It should be arr[:]

This allows you to use numpy operations for vector and matrix data, and to pass numpy arrays to and from SUNDIALS routines efficiently and without unnecessary copies.

User-Supplied Callback Functions
--------------------------------

SUNDIALS packages and several modules/classes require user-supplied callback functions to define problem-specific behavior, 
such as the right-hand side of an ODE or a nonlinear system function. In sundials4py, you can provide these as standard Python functions or lambdas.

> Somethings to note:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some things to note:
```

> Somethings to note:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here are some things to note:
```

- The callback signatures follow the C API. As such, ``N_Vector`` arguments are passed as ``N_Vector`` objects and the underlying ndarray must be extracted in the user code. The only caveat is that return-by-pointer parameters are removed from the signature, and instead become return values (mirroring how return-by-pointer parameters for other functions are handled)
- Most callback signatures include a ``void* user_data`` argument. In Python, this argument must be present in the signature, but it should be ignored.

**Example: ODE right-hand side for ARKStep**

.. code-block:: python

   def rhs(t, y_nvector, ydot_nvector, _):
      # Compute ydot = f(t, y)
      y = N_VGetArrayPointer(y_nvector)
      ydot = N_VGetArrayPointer(ydot_nvector) 
      ydot[:] = -y
      return 0

>    ark = ARKodeView.Create(ARKStepCreate(rhs, None, t0, y.get(), sunctx.get()))

Reviewer: Can you explain why this call to `ARKStepCreate` had to be wrapped inside `ARKodeView.Create()`, while in the example above that called `CVodeCreate` did not need to be wrapped?

Author: This doc item is out of date (previously this was needed).

**Example: Nonlinear system for KINSOL**

.. code-block:: python

   def fp_function(u_nvector, g_nvector, _):
      # Compute g = F(u)
      u = N_VGetArrayPointer(u_nvector)
      g = N_VGetArrayPointer(g_nvector)
      g[:] = u**2 - 1
      return 0

>    kin = KINView.Create(KINCreate(sunctx.get()))

Reviewer: Similar question as above regarding `ARKStepCreate`.

   KINInit(kin.get(), fp_function, u.get())

**Example: ARKODE LSRKStep dominant eigenvalue estimation function with return-by-pointer parameters**

.. code-block:: python

   # The C signature is:
   # int(sunrealtype t, N_Vector y, N_Vector fn,
   #     sunrealtype* lambdaR, sunrealtype* lambdaI,
   #     void* user_data, N_Vector temp1,
   #     N_Vector temp2, N_Vector temp3)
   def dom_eig(t, yvec, fnvec, temp1, temp2, temp3, _):
        lamdbaR = L
        lamdbaI = 0.0
        # lambdaR and lambdaI should be returned in the order that they appear
        # as parameters in the C API and follow the error code to return
        return 0, lamdbaR, lamdbaI

.. warning::

>    The ``user_data`` argument is should always be ``None`` on the Python side, but if it is not it should be ignored to avoid causing catastrophic errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The ``user_data`` argument should always be ``None`` or ``_`` on the Python side.  If it is listed otherwise then it should be ignored to avoid causing catastrophic errors.
```

- Most callback signatures include a ``void* user_data`` argument. In Python, this argument must be present in the signature, but it should be ignored.

**Example: ODE right-hand side for ARKStep**

.. code-block:: python

   def rhs(t, y_nvector, ydot_nvector, _):
      # Compute ydot = f(t, y)
      y = N_VGetArrayPointer(y_nvector)
      ydot = N_VGetArrayPointer(ydot_nvector) 
      ydot[:] = -y
      return 0

   ark = ARKStepCreate(rhs, None, t0, y, sunctx)

**Example: Nonlinear system for KINSOL**

.. code-block:: python

   def fp_function(u_nvector, g_nvector, _):
      # Compute g = F(u)
      u = N_VGetArrayPointer(u_nvector)
      g = N_VGetArrayPointer(g_nvector)
      g[:] = u**2 - 1
      return 0

   kin = KINCreate(sunctx)
   KINInit(kin.get(), fp_function, u)

**Example: ARKODE LSRKStep dominant eigenvalue estimation function with return-by-pointer parameters**

.. code-block:: python

   # The C signature is:
   # int(sunrealtype t, N_Vector y, N_Vector fn,
   #     sunrealtype* lambdaR, sunrealtype* lambdaI,
   #     void* user_data, N_Vector temp1,
   #     N_Vector temp2, N_Vector temp3)

>    def dom_eig(t, yvec, fnvec, temp1, temp2, temp3, _):

Reviewer 3: Is this ordering correct?
```suggestion
   def dom_eig(t, yvec, fnvec, _, temp1, temp2, temp3):
```
